.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Moriarty contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd July 2025
.Dt MORIARTY\-TOOL\-RULES 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm moriarty\-tool\-rules
.Nd tool call permissioning rules for moriarty
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Tool rules permission any Claude Code tool call \(em not just Bash.
They are configured as
.Ic [[tool_rules]]
entries in
.Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
and are checked
.Em before
bash rules, providing a unified way to control tool access.
.Pp
Both tool rules and bash rules coexist in the same configuration file.
See
.Xr moriarty\-bash\-rules 5
for bash\-specific rules.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
.Ss File Location
.Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
.Pp
The path respects
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
if set.
.Ss Rule Structure
Each tool rule is a TOML array\-of\-tables entry:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[tool_rules]]
name = "descriptive\-name"
tool = "ToolName"
allow_local = true          # optional
field = "field_name"       # optional
pattern = "regex\-pattern"  # optional
action = { type = "ActionType", value = "..." }
.Ed
.Ss Fields
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic name
A descriptive name for the rule, used in log output.
.It Ic tool
Exact tool name to match, or
.Ql *
to match any tool.
Known tools include:
.Cm Read ,
.Cm Write ,
.Cm Edit ,
.Cm Bash ,
.Cm Glob ,
and
.Cm Grep .
.It Ic allow_local
Optional.
When set to
.Cm true ,
the rule only matches if the relevant path field resolves to a canonical path within the hook's canonicalized
.Ic cwd .
If
.Ic field
is set to
.Ql path
or
.Ql file_path ,
that specific field must be local.
If
.Ic field
is absent, either field being local is sufficient.
If
.Ic field
is set to any other value, the
.Ic allow_local
check always fails.
Relative paths are resolved against
.Ic cwd .
Existing paths are fully canonicalized; non\-existent paths are checked by canonicalizing the deepest existing ancestor and safely rebuilding the missing suffix so
.Ql ..
cannot escape above that ancestor.
Symlinks that resolve outside
.Ic cwd
are rejected, and broken symlinks are treated as non\-local.
Hard links are treated as ordinary local filesystem entries and are not distinguished from regular files.
.It Ic field
Optional.
The name of a field in the tool input to match against.
Must be paired with
.Ic pattern ;
if only one is present, the rule is skipped and a configuration error is logged.
.It Ic pattern
Optional.
A regular expression
.Pq Rust regex syntax
to match against the value of
.Ic field .
Must be paired with
.Ic field .
Pattern fragments
.Pq see Xr moriarty\-bash\-rules 5
may be used with
.Ql {{fragment_name}}
syntax.
If
.Ic allow_local
is also enabled, both checks must pass.
.It Ic action
The action to take when the rule matches.
One of
.Cm Allow ,
.Cm Deny ,
or
.Cm Ask .
See
.Sx ACTIONS .
.El
.Ss Field Pattern Matching
When
.Ic field
and
.Ic pattern
are both specified,
.Nm moriarty
extracts the field value from the tool input:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Em Strings :
matched directly
.Pq e.g., file_path, content .
.It
.Em Numbers :
converted to string
.Pq e.g., 42 becomes \(lq42\(rq .
.It
.Em Booleans :
converted to
.Ql true
or
.Ql false .
.It
.Em Arrays, Objects, Null :
cannot be matched; the rule does not apply.
.El
.Ss CWD Prefix Stripping
Claude Code sends absolute paths in tool inputs
.Pq e.g., /home/user/project/src/main.rs .
Before regex matching,
.Nm moriarty
strips the hook input's
.Ic cwd
prefix from field values, so rules can use relative paths.
For example, with
.Ic cwd = \(lq/home/user/project\(rq ,
the field value
.Pa /home/user/project/src/main.rs
becomes
.Pa src/main.rs
for matching purposes.
If the value does not start with
.Ic cwd ,
it is matched as\-is.
.Pp
When
.Ic allow_local
is enabled,
.Nm moriarty
also canonicalizes
.Ic cwd
and checks
.Ic path
and
.Ic file_path
against it before any regex match is considered successful.
.Sh ACTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm Allow
Permit the tool call without user confirmation.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.It Cm Deny
Block the tool call and display an error message.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
action = { type = "Deny", value = "reason message" }
.Ed
.It Cm Ask
Defer to the user for case\-by\-case authorization.
Claude Code will prompt the user to approve or deny.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
action = { type = "Ask" }
.Ed
.El
.Pp
Note:
.Cm Modify
and
.Cm ArgumentFilter
actions are only available in bash rules.
.Sh EVALUATION ORDER
.Bd -literal -offset indent
PreToolUse event (any tool)
  |
  +\-> tool_rules engine (first\-match\-wins)
  |     tool matches?
  |       \-> allow_local check (if enabled)
  |       \-> field/pattern regex check (if configured)
  |     Match found? \-> return Allow/Deny/Ask
  |     No match?    \-> continue
  |
  +\-> tool_name == "Bash"?
  |     Yes \-> bash_rules engine
  |     No  \-> defer to Claude Code (no decision)
.Ed
.Pp
Rules are evaluated in order.
The first matching rule determines the action
.Pq first\-match\-wins semantics .
.Sh EXAMPLES
Allow read\-only tools, deny writing to
.Pa .env
files, ask for everything else:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[tool_rules]]
name = "allow\-read"
tool = "Read"
action = { type = "Allow" }

[[tool_rules]]
name = "allow\-glob"
tool = "Glob"
action = { type = "Allow" }

[[tool_rules]]
name = "deny\-write\-env"
tool = "Write"
field = "file_path"
pattern = "\e\e.env$"
action = { type = "Deny", value = "Cannot write to .env files" }

[[tool_rules]]
name = "ask\-unknown"
tool = "*"
action = { type = "Ask" }
.Ed
.Pp
Using pattern fragments:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[pattern_fragments]
project = "/home/user/project"

[[tool_rules]]
name = "allow\-project\-read"
tool = "Read"
field = "file_path"
pattern = "^{{project}}/"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Pp
Restrict writes to local Rust source files under the current working directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[tool_rules]]
name = "allow\-local\-src\-writes"
tool = "Write"
allow_local = true
field = "file_path"
pattern = "^src/.*\e\.rs$"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
Tool and bash rules configuration file.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/moriarty/logs/
Log files showing rule evaluation details.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr moriarty 1 ,
.Xr moriarty\-bash\-rules 5
