.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Moriarty contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd July 2025
.Dt MORIARTY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm moriarty
.Nd an assistant for an assistant \(em Claude Code log analysis, API pricing, and tool call permissioning
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm logs
.Fl f Ar file
.Op Fl \-validate
.Nm
.Cm api\-pricing
.Fl d Ar dir
.Op Fl \-timezone Ar local|utc
.Op Fl \-conversations
.Op Fl \-start\-time Ar DATETIME
.Op Fl \-end\-time Ar DATETIME
.Nm
.Cm mcp
.Ar server
.Nm
.Cm approve\-project
.Ar project_dir
.Nm
.Cm hooks exec
.Nm
.Cm test project\-tools
.Op Ar project_dir
.Nm
.Cm test checks
.Op Ar project_dir
.Nm
.Cm test bash\-rules
.Op Fl c Ar config
.Op Fl \-json
.Op Ar command
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a Rust CLI tool for working with Claude Code.
It provides an interactive log viewer, API usage analysis, MCP servers,
and a security hook system for controlling which tools and commands
Claude Code can execute.
.Ss Log Viewer
The
.Cm logs
subcommand opens an interactive TUI for viewing and navigating
Claude Code conversation logs.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl f , Fl \-file Ar file
Path to the log file to read.
.It Fl \-validate
Parse the log and exit instead of opening the viewer.
Returns a non\-zero exit code if parsing fails.
.El
.Ss API Pricing
The
.Cm api\-pricing
subcommand analyzes Claude API usage from log directories
and generates detailed cost reports.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d , Fl \-dir Ar dir
Directory to analyze for API usage.
.It Fl \-timezone Ar local|utc
Timezone for date determination.
Default:
.Ar local .
.It Fl \-conversations
Aggregate by conversation/session instead of by date.
.It Fl \-start\-time Ar DATETIME
Start time filter in ISO 8601 format
.Pq e.g., 2025\-01\-01T00:00:00Z .
UTC is assumed if no timezone is specified.
.It Fl \-end\-time Ar DATETIME
End time filter in ISO 8601 format.
.El
.Ss MCP Servers
The
.Cm mcp
subcommand runs one of the built\-in Model Context Protocol servers
for git operations and project tools.
.Ss Project Approval
The
.Cm approve\-project
subcommand opens a TUI to approve project tools
defined in
.Pa .config/tools.toml
for MCP server execution.
.Ss Hooks
The
.Cm hooks exec
subcommand executes Claude Code hooks, reading input from stdin
and applying configured tool and bash rules.
This is the entry point used by Claude Code's hook system.
.Ss Test Commands
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm test project\-tools Op Ar project_dir
Run all configured project tools in parallel.
Defaults to the current directory.
.It Cm test checks Op Ar project_dir
Run all configured project checks in parallel.
.It Cm test bash\-rules Op Ar command
Test a bash command against configured rules.
If no command is provided, reads from stdin.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl \-config Ar path
Custom config file path.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml .
.It Fl \-json
Output results as JSON instead of pretty\-printed text.
.El
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for configuration files.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.config .
.It Ev XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for state files including logs.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.local/state .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
Tool and bash rules configuration file.
See
.Xr moriarty\-tool\-rules 5
and
.Xr moriarty\-bash\-rules 5 .
.It Pa ~/.local/state/moriarty/logs/
Runtime log directory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr moriarty\-tool\-rules 5 ,
.Xr moriarty\-bash\-rules 5
